# datavis-project

For this project, I was tasked with developing teaching and demonstration materials for a range of outreach options which are focused on data exploration and visualisation. I decided to focus my time on exploring Python and JavaScript libraries, namely Bokeh, pandas, matplotlib, Seaborn, and D3.js, each of which has its own unique characteristics, advantages, and disadvantages which I will now discuss. 

The first library I looked at was the Python library Bokeh. One key difference between Bokeh and some of the other tools I have looked at is that it does not depend upon any other libraries, aiming to allows users to create visualisations in modern web browsers like D3.js. While Bokeh is very powerful and allows for the creation of complex plots using simple means, it would not quite match D3 in terms of the level of functionality it offers. However, for a wide variety of purposes, Bokeh is a fantastic tool which users with varying levels of technical expertise can use to quickly and simply create interactive, effective plots even with large datasets.

The next library I explored was pandas. Again, this is a Python library, however its strengths vary a little from those of Bokeh. I found pandas to be a great library for data processing; data from files can easily be fed into one of pandas's key objects, the DataFrame, in which the data is neatly stored in a table with indexed rows and labeled columns. From here, the data can be accessed and edited very simply, with many functions such as groupby() allowing users to quickly manipulate their data and view it from different angles. Working with pandas reminded me of using MySQL as a lot of the code I was writing felt like database queries, except instead of accessing a database, I was accessing a DataFrame (which is very like a database in many ways). When paired with a library that excels in creating attractive, useful visualisations which make the data come to life, pandas is a hugely powerful tool.

Nextly, I took a look at matplotlib. Matplotlib was first released in 2003 and is now a well established visualisation library used by scientists and researchers across the world. Its documentation is comprehensive and it is very effective at generating plots quickly and reasonably easily. The plots have quite a "no frills" appearance and perhaps look slightly outdated when compared with some modern visualisation libraries; it also lacks in the level of interactivity it offers in comparison to libraries like D3. However, in spite of the challenges it faces, matplotlib remains one of the leading Python visualisation libraries whose downfalls will likely be overcome with more development and/or pairing with other libraries.

The last Python library I will mention is seaborn. Seaborn is based on matplotlib and one of its main advantages (and the main purpose for which I used it) is that it offers an incredibly simple means of making the output of matplotlib plots far more aesthetically pleasing. All one needs to do is simply import the seaborn library to immediately see the changes. While it is possible to improve the appearance of matplotlib graphs using matplotlib, it would take a lot of tweaks and time to achieve what one can with one line of code using seaborn. The library offers many different ways of changing how a plot looks which are explored in more detail in the seaborn notebook in this repository. In my opinion, it is a very useful tool which goes a long way in improving matplotlib's slightly outdated graphics.

As well as the above Python libraries, I was also fortunate enough to have the opportunity to explore the JavaScript library D3.js. D3 is designed for web browsers and is a pretty new library, only being released in 2011, however it has been very successful since that time and is widely viewed as an incredibly powerful, innovative addition to the data visualisation world. D3 is popular for a number of reasons. It works with the existing technologies HTML, CSS, and SVG, and allows users to easily access and change any part of the Document Object Model; it offers a very high level of interactivity which has become increasingly important in the modern world where users expect more and more to be able to explore large amounts of data; it is very flexible and can be tweaked in countless different ways to create exactly the type of output you want; and it is easy to learn once you know the basics of JavaScript. One of the best resources online for learning D3 was created by code artist Scott Murray - it is an online version of his book "Interactive Data Visualisation for the Web" which the publisher O'Reilly has made available to read for free here: http://chimera.labs.oreilly.com/books/1230000000345/index.html

Overall, I have thoroughly enjoyed exploring the aforementioned libraries and have found each to be useful in their own way. My favourite of them all would probably be D3.js, mainly due to the fact that, with it, one has the ability to code every little detail of their visualisations from the ground up which offers an incredible amount of flexibility when it comes to deciding how best to represent a particular set of data. With effort and patience, the results one can achieve with this library are very exciting and I would definitely encourage those interested in exploring data visualisation further to take a look at D3. I hope that the acommpanying materials will offer an insight into some of the current prominent libraries in the data visualisation world and I look forward to keeping up to date with future updates and changes within this field.
